Review: ‘The Mandalorian,’ a Gunslinger in a Galaxy Far, Far Away
The highly entertaining new “Star Wars” series, the marquee attraction of the Disney Plus originals, is a test of the limits of franchise extension.


In “The Mandalorian,” Pedro Pascal, left, is a helmeted bounty hunter who gets occasional help from sidekicks like a crusty farmer named Kuiil, voiced by Nick Nolte.
In “The Mandalorian,” Pedro Pascal, left, is a helmeted bounty hunter who gets occasional help from sidekicks like a crusty farmer named Kuiil, voiced by Nick Nolte.Credit...Lucasfilm Ltd.
Mike Hale
By Mike Hale
Nov. 15, 2019

22
Before we get to “The Mandalorian,” let’s talk for a minute about Martin Scorsese.

Exaggerating to make a point — and tweaking the imperial pretensions of the phrase Marvel Cinematic Universe — Scorsese recently maintained that Marvel movies were “not cinema.”

Now I would like to think that Scorsese, like me and most of the sensible people I know, realized that Marvel’s “Black Panther” was one of the better movies nominated for the best-picture Oscar this year, if not the best. (He may have preferred “Roma”; people who throw around the word “cinema” generally did.)

But his point stands, reinforced by the sometimes wounded and humorless response it invoked. It is possible — easy, with small enough budgets — for movies to answer primarily to the personal, artistic choices of filmmakers, and that is how the very best movies get made. It is not possible for blockbuster-aspiring franchise sequels to be made that way — they will always be constrained by the need to answer to nervous rights holders and demanding fan bases.

Which brings us back to “The Mandalorian.” It isn’t a film, but it’s in the continuum of which Scorsese spoke — a series that extends the “Star Wars” franchise overseen by Marvel’s corporate cousin Lucasfilm, and is a star attraction of another wing of the Disney empire, the new streaming service Disney Plus.

ADVERTISEMENT

Continue reading the main story

And while two shortish episodes — at about 40 and 30 minutes, they’re conspicuously pithy by the current standards of streaming drama — aren’t much to judge by, at this point “The Mandalorian” is, like more than a few franchise films, pretty good.

A prototypical space western with a laconic hero in the Clint Eastwood-John Wayne mold (John Ford’s Wayne-and-a-baby film “3 Godfathers” comes to mind), it’s well paced and reasonably clever, with enough style and visual panache to keep your eyes engaged. The dusty landscapes and hulking machinery stand up to their counterparts in the “Star Wars” films, and the strange animated beasts exceed them. (Andrew L. Jones, an art director for films like “Avatar” and “The Adventures of Tintin,” gets his first production designer credit.)

Unlock more free articles.
Create an account or log in
But is it cinema? Probably not, according to the Scorsese definition. Because as much as it succeeds at being its own thing, it is still recognizably — overwhelmingly — a “Star Wars” thing, a sector in a centrally controlled economy that extends from theaters to video games to (just to buttress the Scorsese case) a new theme park extension being rolled out at Disneyland.

And in a display of true corporate synergy, this “Star Wars” property was entrusted to a veteran of the Marvel Cinematic Universe. The series was created, and its first two episodes written, by Jon Favreau, who inaugurated the M.C.U. by directing “Iron Man” and has produced multiple Avengers films.

Editors’ Picks

A Book So Far Ahead of Its Time, It Took 87 Years to Find a Publisher

‘S.N.L.’ Takes Aim at the Democratic Debate and Trump’s Acquittal

A Kobe Bryant Joke Goes Wrong, Revealing Comedy’s Troll Side
Continue reading the main story


ImageWerner Herzog plays one of the Mandalorian’s shifty clients.
Werner Herzog plays one of the Mandalorian’s shifty clients.Credit...Lucasfilm Ltd.
For “The Mandalorian,” Favreau and his fellow executive producer Dave Filoni developed a gunslinger hero, so far unnamed (like Eastwood’s archetypal spaghetti-western character), who shares a lineage with the cult-favorite “Star Wars” villain Boba Fett. Like Fett, the Mandalorian is a bounty hunter who never removes his armor; here, where he’s in the hero’s role, his ever-present helmet upends the usual “Star Wars” dichotomy in which the facelessness of the Empire’s troops is a simple signifier of evil.

ADVERTISEMENT

Continue reading the main story

Throughout these early episodes, you can see Favreau and Filoni looking for ways to make “The Mandalorian” stand apart from its heritage. A notable difference is the low-key score by Ludwig Goransson, which eschews the emotionally pummeling surges of John Williams’s “Star Wars” music. The series is quieter in general, and so far has none of the inspirational speechifying that can deaden the films. Viewers should stick around through the end credits, which feature moody painted scenes evocative of comic books or the covers of pulp novels (rather than the film serials that inspired George Lucas to make the original “Star Wars”).

But as the Mandalorian goes through his paces — a few battles to establish his talent for violence, the acceptance of an iffy bounty contract, the acquisition of a curmudgeonly sidekick, a surprise twist that humanizes him and sets the season’s story in motion — it’s also clear that we’re firmly within the Jediverse. The opening scene, set in a frontier cantina, is pure “Star Wars” fan service. Children scurry about in cloaks playing diminutive alien gangs. The major reveal at the end of the first episode is a big “aww” in the context of “Star Wars” history, but again, it’s in that context.

And there’s nothing necessarily wrong with that. Watching the gruff, lumbering, suddenly protective Mandalorian safeguard his tiny but powerful new charge promises to be a droll and potentially moving process. (It’s hard to say about performances — we can’t see the face of Pedro Pascal, as the helmeted Mandalorian, nor that of Nick Nolte, who provides a nicely acerbic voice for the crusty farmer Kuiil. The casting of Werner Herzog as the Mandalorian’s haughty client looks like a stunt, so far.)

But around the edges there’s a sense, ever so slightly dispiriting, that “The Mandalorian” will carry out the fundamental mission of the “Star Wars” franchise across four decades: to keep faith with the essential corniness and two-dimensionality of George Lucas’s original conception.

Favreau and Filoni slow it down, make it look good, take out some of the sentimentality, give it some sophistication and let you feel smart for enjoying it. That’s not cinema, that’s peak TV.
“The Mandalorian” is unbelievably short. The episodes are like extended trailers. Not enough to time to get into the thing. 30 minutes once a week! weak, weak, weak.

RecommendShareFlag
Greg commented November 19, 2019
G
Greg
BrooklynNov. 19, 2019
"Now I would like to think that Scorsese, like me and most of the sensible people I know, realized that Marvel’s “Black Panther” was one of the better movies nominated for the best-picture Oscar this year, if not the best."

Whether it was one of the better movies or not is entirely subjective. What is quite obnoxious is your implication that it must be acknowledged as such, or else. Wokeness purity tests should be antithetical to you as a critic, not something you smugly impose on your betters.

8 RecommendShareFlag
jrd commented November 19, 2019
J
jrd
nyNov. 19, 2019
Yes, middle-brow critics loved "Black Panther".  Or so they claimed.  

For this viewer, it typified everything wrong with commercial moviemaking.  In that it was hardly unique -- pick any Marvel movie, or any number of other blockbusters.  What was unique was the respect it got.

Is it really that hard to figure out why?

6 RecommendShareFlag
Steven Gordon commented November 19, 2019
S
Steven Gordon
NYCNov. 19, 2019
Totally self-absorbing comment by Martin Scorsese. Cinema is all about entertainment, it can encompass all forms of entertainment whether it be Mr. Scorsese's high-brow idea or Marvel's low-brow idea.

3 RecommendShareFlag
Chris Woll commented November 19, 2019
C
Chris Woll
St. LouisNov. 19, 2019
If I want quality viewing the theater isn't where I go to find it. I go to the subscription based providers like HBO, Netflix, Prime and to a lesser extent Hulu.

I don't watch broadcast TV anymore either with it's I.Q. point draining talent shows, dramas, dating shows and the morning "news" shows I used to like starting my day with. 

It's a remarkable dichotomy though because there have been some spectacular programming, just not from the legacy providers.

And there aren't any political advertisements which is going to pay off in spades sometime in the near future.

1 RecommendShareFlag
K In Colorado commented November 19, 2019
K
K In Colorado
LongmontNov. 19, 2019
Based on these comments and Scorsese’s argument, one can also wonder whether the 007 franchise—even The Thin Man series—and any long lived series are “cinema.” Perhaps the first movie in each, and the occasional standout (Casino Royale) that violate the formula. For me the issue is whether a film tells a good story, but there are plenty of bad films that are not part of a franchise just as Bond is not always compelling. Does that mean they are not cinema?

2 RecommendShareFlag
Matt commented November 19, 2019
M
Matt
OregonNov. 19, 2019
Thank you JF for NOT feeling the need and the pressure to fill voids of silence.  This is just plain good TV.  As I was watching, I thought about how many would claim it slow and boring and the comments so far seem to prove that.  So many movies, cinema, and TV nowadays pander to the quick cut, snarky humor in serious moments and empty plot holes to keep the youth's attention. Simple, quiet and those classic moments of silence help elevate this great ( 2 in) series.  The brilliance of the Boba Fett lore is that he doesn't interact, doesn't converse, and does ever feel the need to fill the silence.

5 RecommendShareFlag
Clotario commented November 19, 2019
C
Clotario
NYCNov. 19, 2019
Not sure I agree with the reviewer that this was pretty good, and certainly take issue with Black Panther being the best movie of 2019 (particularly since it was released early in 2018) or being anything more than a typical superhero movie.

I watched 3/4 of the first Mandalorian last night, was struck how boring it was. Not only was the pace slow, but it had virtually no aural texture. I am not a fan of noisy and loud, but this just had nothing to grab on to while the story plodded along. Also, at one point he encountered some blue person in a cantina place, and the extremely alien looking blue person had what could only be described as a normal english speaking voice. Disconcerting, and took the viewer mentally out of the drama.

Could this be a new subscription based streaming strategy? We have encountered a number of shows over the past few years were the story develops slooooowly, to the point of us getting frustrated with it. We find as viewers we cannot rest in the story to just enjoy it because something is always developing, but neither can we enjoy the ride because the structure seems designed to keep you in anticipation rather than efficiently telling a story.

Turned it off; the kids later realized they wanted to watch too. Turned it back on, took them five minutes to lose interest.

4 RecommendShareFlag
Albert Ferreira commented November 19, 2019
Albert Ferreira
Albert Ferreira
CaliforniaNov. 19, 2019
I have the opportunity to experience both Disney+ and AppleTV+ for free for a time. Comparing both streaming services, Apple has a long way to go to compete with Disney. "The Mandalorian" has already been critically reviewed intelligently by many. I agree with those reviews. Apple's premier show "The Morning Show" seems more like a slow moving evening soap opera.

4 RecommendShareFlag
Mark Moses commented November 19, 2019
M
Mark Moses
HarlemNov. 19, 2019
Mike Hale - you lost me in your second paragraph - "Black Panther" was one of the best movies - it was fun, but it didn't even rate as one of Marvel's top ten.  And this is your basis for criticizing Martin Scorsese?  Critics!

8 RecommendShareFlag
1 REPLY
SJG commented November 19, 2019
S
SJG
NY, NYNov. 19, 2019
@Mark Moses 
Agreed. Black Panther was good. But it wasn't even the best Marvel movie in the year it come out...let alone one of the best movies of the year.

3 RecommendShareFlag
Brian commented November 19, 2019
B
Brian
TexasNov. 19, 2019
After the first two episodes, I feel a bigger inspiration than Clint Eastwood Spaghetti Westerns may be Kazuo Koike's serialized "Lone Wolf and Cub" manga. 

Without getting into too many spoilers, there is a battle between mercenaries, a "bundle" the Mandalorian accepts responsibility for in a dangerous land (rather than giving it a semi-merciful death), and a sense that the journey is about to become its own reward.

Plus, it's not as if it would be the first time Star Wars borrowed heavily from Japanese culture (see Akira Kurosawa's "The Hidden Fortress").

8 RecommendShareFlag
Timothy P P Roberts commented November 19, 2019
T
Timothy P P Roberts
Manhattan Beach, CANov. 19, 2019
Having to subscribe to HBO to watch “Westworld”, Amazon Prime to view “The Man in the High Castle”, and Netflix for “Stranger Things” I learned to recognize the cash cow of subscription TV series.  Therein, the producer’s goal is not to entertain with literature’s classic exposition and climax - but to entice return viewership - ensuring monthly subscription.  Known settings with slow plot development and lack of denouement are the traits of this machine.

Two episodes of “The Mandalorian” were enough for me to identify the goal of draining my wallet.  No thank you.

9 RecommendShareFlag
4 REPLIES
Justin commented November 19, 2019
J
Justin
CTNov. 19, 2019
@Timothy P P Roberts 

Scorcese shares that goal.  

Did you find either this show or his work entertaining, though?  That seems more to the point.

RecommendShareFlag
GKR commented November 19, 2019
G
GKR
MANov. 19, 2019
@Timothy P P Roberts  Both Netflix and Prime drop all episodes of a season all at once.  You only need to subscribe for one month to watch a new season of "Stranger Things" or “The Man in the High Castle”.

RecommendShareFlag
Timothy Roberts commented November 19, 2019
T
Timothy Roberts
Hollyglenn, CANov. 19, 2019
@Justin - why is it a zero sum game?  Scorsese gets my appreciation for directing all aspects of his movies - not shipping the CGI out to someone else.  However, Toy Story was the first “perfectly directed” movie in that someone had to decide the format of the blades of grass.  Ironically, Black Panther was more cartoonish with its greater realism.

RecommendShareFlag
VIEW ALL REPLIES
Fred commented November 19, 2019
F
Fred
Scottsdale, AZNov. 19, 2019
Episode IV was seen in a drive-in theater with my, barely, six-month old daughter in the car’s backseat. She will be 43 next month. I am by no means a “Treky” but have seen them all and enjoyed all but I, II, and III.
While I have been intrigued by the slower pace of Mandalorian I am calming down to enjoy it. Strangely, Pedro’s voice sounds just like Clint Eastwoods, which I am sure is intentional. My only criticism after two episodes is trying to bond with a character who has no face or expression. That is holding my enthusiasm a bit.

1 RecommendShareFlag
2 REPLIES
GKR commented November 19, 2019
G
GKR
MANov. 19, 2019
@Fred “Treky”  refers to fans of the TV series "Star Trek";  not "Star Wars".

1 RecommendShareFlag
David Good commented November 19, 2019
D
David Good
SausalitoNov. 19, 2019
I am not sure your definition of trekkie is the conventional one. :)

1 RecommendShareFlag
Keith Dow commented November 19, 2019
Keith Dow
Keith Dow
Folsom CaNov. 19, 2019
"A prototypical space western with a laconic hero in the Clint Eastwood-John Wayne mold (John Ford’s Wayne-and-a-baby film “3 Godfathers” comes to mind), it’s well paced and reasonably clever, with enough style and visual panache to keep your eyes engaged."

Use wrote "Clint Eastwood-John Wayne mold" seriously? John Wayne played a hero. He portrayed a fight of good against evil. Clint Eastwood played an antihero. He played a bounty hunter who was just in it for the money. They are completely different.